InfoVis 2011

Reviews of submission #110: "Product plots"

------------------------ Submission 110, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary
Overall rating:     4  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Paper type

   Theory / Model

Expertise

   3  (Expert)

Overall Rating

   4  (Probably accept: This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Supplemental Materials

   Not applicable (no supplemental materials were submitted with the paper)

Justification

   This paper shows how a small set of partition operators and simple
   graphical primitives can be used to construct a wide variety of
   rectangular plots that use area to encode frequency (count) data.
   Continuous distributions are supported via binning.

   Though not completely novel, the presented model contributes to our array
   of methods for characterizing and generating visualizations. It may also
   have the potential to further spur needed research along these lines.

The Review

   The presented formalism is clean, compact and can be used to generate a
   wide variety of plots. The simplicity and expressiveness of the model is
   attractive; the authors demonstrate how it can be used to generate a
   range of plots on a sample database.

   However, the model is presented in a rather self-contained manner. Sure,
   the model can generate a large number of plots, but how many of those
   plots are actually useful? Is it difficult for analysts to choose the
   "right" plots? How might graphical perception guidelines or other
   heuristics be used to help search and prune the space? I would have liked
   to see the authors close the loop on their discussed interactive
   navigation methods.

   The paper is concise, which is great. However, this also means there is
   plenty of space to add additional needed detail:

   First, related work is distributed throughout the paper. A consolidated
   related work section addressing similar work and clearly delineating the
   contributions of the present work is needed. Other visualization models
   of interest include Slingsby et al's HiVE, Wilkinson's Grammar of
   Graphics, Mackinlay's APT, and Stolte et al's Polaris. A detailed
   comparison with such prior work is a pre-requisite to publication. How do
   such models compare in terms of expressiveness and notational efficiency?
   (My score of 4 is contingent on the assumption that such a section will
   be added...)

   Second, I'm curious how much effort is necessary to use product plots in
   practice. Some examples of statements in R and the corresponding plots
   should suffice (and potentially examples of an interactive UI for product
   plot construction).

   Third, is anyone using the system to perform analyses? While not strictly
   necessary, example analysis case studies supported by product plots might
   help convey the value of the model.

   MISCELLANEA

   There is a line break after "Abstract-". The abstract text should begin
   on the same line.

   "the areas of rectangles are easier to compare than areas of other shapes
   [5-7]" -> This is somewhat glibly stated. A quick review of the cited
   papers does not support the claim: [5] does not assess area empirically;
   [6] assesses circular and arbitrary polygonal areas, but not rectangles;
   [7] compares circles and rectangles, but the difference does not appear
   to be statistically significant. Later in the paper, there is a similar
   critique of non-rectangular polygons using the results of [6]. I don't
   think this is appropriate -- [6] uses irregular polygons, whereas
   techniques like voronoi treemaps generate convex polygons with average
   bounding box aspect ratios near unity. Thus the argument here is also
   unsubstantiated. It may well be that rectangles are better, but this has
   not been convincingly demonstrated. I recommend the authors consider
   dropping these perceptual arguments.

   Figure 4 overruns its column.

Summary Rating

   4  (Probably accept: This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

The Summary Review

   The reviewers judge Product Plots to be a useful and parsimonious model
   for constructing a large variety of plots and potentially also an example
   that might spur further research in formal models of visualization
   construction. All reviewers agree that this work makes a substantive
   contribution to InfoVis research and argue for acceptance.

   That said, reviewers also raise a number of issues that the authors
   should address prior to publication. Most notable among these is the
   treatment of related work. R1 and R4 in particular list elements of prior
   work that should be considered and discussed. I recommend that the
   authors introduce a dedicated related work section in their next
   revision.

   In addition, the reviewers make a number of helpful suggestions that
   might inform future drafts. I strongly encourage the authors to revise
   the paper accordingly.

------------------------ Submission 110, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           secondary
Overall rating:     4  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Paper type

   Theory / Model

Expertise

   3  (Expert)

Overall Rating

   4  (Probably accept: This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Supplemental Materials

   Not applicable (no supplemental materials were submitted with the paper)

Justification

   The paper is well-written. It simplifies and important category of
   visualization.

The Review

   Review of infovis_paper110.pdf
   Product Plots

   This paper introduces a framework for understanding a broad class of
   categorical visualizations. The framework generalizes some specialized
   plots familiar to these two researchers (especially mosaic plots) and
   should simplify the development of software for these types of
   visualizations in the future. 

   A surprising omission is the work of Wilkinson (1999, 2005) on The
   Grammar of Graphics. Wilkinson introduced the idea of combining graphical
   elements through products of sets (called facets) and embedding these in
   different coordinate systems. In fact, Figure 12 echoes several of the
   figures in the Coordinates chapter of that book. Wilkinson was also the
   first to draw a link between the recursive partitioning in treemaps and
   mosaics and a set product operator. As he explains in Chapter 16 of the
   second edition, the algebra for specifying visualizations of product
   models maps one-to-one to the most common factorial experimental design
   algebra for log-linear models or ANOVA. In any case, the framework in
   this paper appears closer to that of Wilkinson's than to any of the other
   papers cited.

   Minor points:
   Page 1. "This framework is based on the fundamental statistical idea that
   high any high dimensional" Delete the first "high."

   "51 020 and 5 000" use comma delimiters.

   Bottom of page:
   Using the word "all" is a bit strong here. Better to delete the word and
   confine the discussion to "area" plots. There are exceptions, as the
   authors point out later, so avoid the inclusive term.

   The claim for rectangles at the bottom of page 1 is not supported by
   research. The authors, like many statisticians and visualization
   researchers, tend to cite statisticians and computer scientists for
   supportive psychological principles; however, the perceptual and
   cognitive research by non-psychologists tends to have serious
   methodological flaws. I've provided some relevant citations below. There
   are significant biases in area judgments that are exacerbated by extreme
   aspect ratios (something even Kong, Heer & Agrawala noticed in Treemaps).
   The perceptual combining rule for rectangles appears to be more Attneave
   (absolute metric) than product (multiplicative), although see Algom et
   al. for support for the multiplicative rule. The authors need to rephrase
   this statement, eliminating the word "must."

   Also, Simken and Hastie, in one of the few perception articles published
   by psychologists in a statistical journal, demonstrated conclusively that
   pie charts outperform rectangular area charts for proportion of whole
   data. There are some exceptions to their findings, but statisticians need
   to understand that they are largely wrong in their scorn for pie charts.

   We can tile triangles with triangles. And these are "simpler" than
   rectangles. One can also tile the sphere with triangles, which cannot be
   done with rectangles. You need to rethink this assertion. 

   Figure 12. The bottom row is not produced by transforming after rotation.
   It is produced by switching the assignment of x and y to r and theta.
   This is a pivoting operation.

   Page 2.
   "Uniformly distributed" suggest to me a uniform random distribution. Is
   there another way to say this?

   Figure 3. Left and Right are Top and Bottom. LaTeX refused to obey your
   orders, as usual ;o)

   Please italicize n in the fourth line of Section 3. Check that other
   parameters are properly italicized in the text.

   Table 1 and text.
   I was brought up to call it Gender rather than Sex. I think the GSS
   (thanks to Ed Laumann) is obsessed with sex, so we'll let it go.

   References:
   Algom, D., Wolf, Y., & Bergman, B. (1985). Integration of stimulus
   dimensions in perception and memory: Composition rules and psychophysical
   relations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 451-471.

   Anderson, N.H. and Weiss, D.J. (1971). Test of a multiplying model for
   estimated are of rectangles. American Journal of Psychology, 84, 4,
   543-548.

   Borg, I. and Leutner, D. (1983). Dimensional models for the perception of
   rectangles. Perception & Psychophysics, 34, 257-267.

   Kidman, G. (1997). Area integration rules. In F. Biddulph & K. Carr
   (Eds.), People in mathematics (Proceedings of the 20th annual conference
   of the Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia (Vol. 1, pp.
   271 - 277).

   Mates, J., Di Maio, V., and Lansky, P. (1992). A model of the perception
   of area. Spatial Vision, 6, 101-116. 

   Morgan M.J. (2005). The visual computation of 2-D area by human
   observers. Vision Research, 45(19), 2564-70.

------------------------ Submission 110, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external
Overall rating:     4  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Paper type

   Theory / Model

Expertise

   2  (Knowledgeable)

Overall Rating

   4  (Probably accept: This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Supplemental Materials

   Not applicable (no supplemental materials were submitted with the paper)

Justification

   Overall the paper is well written and provides a novel formalism for
   generating a wide range of area plots by combining 1D and 2D primitive
   plots. Importantly, it ties this plot generation method to the
   decomposition of high-dimensional pdfs to lower dimensional marginal and
   conditional distributions. The organization and presentation is well done
   and will likely encourage more rigorous thinking about plot semantics in
   infovis.

   The biggest weakness of the paper is that it's not clear that the
   proposed formalism leads to any useful new visualizations. Despite this,
   I believe that the paper provides a useful contribution to the infovis
   literature.

The Review

   This paper presents a formalism for recursively constructing area plots
   out of 1D and 2D plot primitives. I think there are two criteria by which
   one should evaluate this formalism. First, does it lead to more insight
   into current practices? The answer to this is a definite yes. The authors
   successfully show that a wide range of existing plot types can be
   described as resulting from the composition of the area-based primitives.
   More importantly, the authors demonstrate that there is a correspondence
   between plot composition from graphical primitives and distribution
   composition from conditional and marginal distributions. This should help
   infovis researchers to better understand how existing plots should be
   used and what analytic questions they can best answer. I believe it could
   also lead to interesting new interfaces which allow the user to directly
   specify the statistical question they want answered and which then
   automatically create an appropriate distribution and then an appropriate
   plot.

   The second evaluation criteria is does the formalism lead to new useful
   visualization types? On this score the paper is less successful. The
   authors do provide a few examples of novel plot types, but make no effort
   to demonstrate that they are better than existing ones. Indeed, at first
   glance they appear rather difficult to read. The authors also suggest
   that the area decomposition method might be useful for handling higher
   dimensional data sets, but given the difficulty in reading some of their
   3d plots, I think some skepticism is warranted. Further, as the authors
   point out, the combination of 4 primitives and the alternative
   decomposition methods for high dimensional distributions leads to a very
   large number of possible plots. It seems likely that many combinations of
   primitives will be exceedingly difficult to read. So the proposed
   formalism is not parsimonious; a better formalism would exclude
   ineffective plots.

   Finally, I wonder if the authors considered any other graphical
   composition method than nesting areas? While nesting areas allowed them
   to encompass a number of existing plot types, other composition methods
   might be more useful for extension to higher dimensions. For example,
   what about simply showing a separate plot for each component?

   Despite the shortcomings of the paper on the second criteria and my
   skepticism about area-nesting, I think the paper provides an important
   contribution on the first criteria and will lead to new research
   directions and, thus, should be accepted. Since I believe that the
   connection between plot types and distribution decompositions is the
   major contribution of the paper, I recommend that the authors:

   -label all appropriate plots in the paper with the corresponding
   distribution decomposition (directly label, not just mention in the text
   or in the caption)
   -flesh out section 3.1. Assuming that infovis readers will not know what
   conditional and marginal distributions are, the authors should
   demonstrate how they are computed from the joint distribution. Providing
   the graphical analogs to the tables in Figure 4 would be extremely
   helpful. (I realize that a marginal and a conditional distribution from
   Figure 4 are represented in Figure 5, but the connection is never made
   explicitly in the text. Some hand holding would be very helpful here.)
   Hand hold better the analytic questions that each distribution helps
   answer. E.g. "What proportion of males are very happy? The bottom left
   entries tells us it's 31%."


   Minor comments----

   Why squarified treemaps? Heer work showing non-square treemaps are easier
   to read.

   Section 3.1 

   Its not clear from the wording in the first paragraph that the marginal
   and conditional distributions contain less information than the joint
   distribution. If you're going to assume that your readers don't know what
   the marginal and conditional distributions are (plausible for the InfoVis
   crowd), then it would make sense to briefly describe how they are
   computed from the joint distribution.

   Fix the formatting of the tables in Figure 4.

   Clarify in the last paragraph that in addition to the 3 factorings,
   permutations of the variables leads to more variations.

   "It remains to find an [sic] graphical analog of this multiplication."
   seems unnecessarily dramatic. We already know you found one.

   Section 3.2 

   Label Figure 5 with the distribution forms, f(happy), f(happy|sex),
   f(happy, sex), rather than just mention them in the text.

   Figure 7 shows, f(marital | age) f(age) and f(age | marital) f(marital),
   right? Say this in the text and label figures.

   "the relationship between proportion and area is only constant within a
   level" -- is there a better way to say this? I think you mean level as in
   nesting level, not level as is a level of a factor, right? In Figure 7
   (right), the nested bar charts are all sized proportionally with respect
   to each other even though they occur in different levels of the marital
   status factor.

   Figure 8 middle would be better with a bar chart, right? Why show both
   the middle and right plots; they're basically the same.

   Section 6.2

   Why limit yourself to a finite number of bins? Push the number of bins to
   infinity and you can display line graphs (density plots) with hbar,
   stacked line graphs (hbar+vspine), relative area (hspine+vspine),
   overlaid line charts (hbar+hbar), or (hspine+hbar) (don't know the name
   of this chart, basically overlaid line charts, but where the sum of
   values at each vertical slice is 1).

------------------------ Submission 110, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external
Overall rating:     4  (scale is 1..5; 5 is best)

Paper type

   Theory / Model

Expertise

   1  (No or passing Knowledge)

Overall Rating

   4  (Probably accept: This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Supplemental Materials

   Not applicable (no supplemental materials were submitted with the paper)

Justification

   Fitting such a range of visualisations into a consistent framework is an
   interesting contribution - perhaps the novelty is arguable, but my
   opinion is that it's valuable. Clarifying the paper type by removing
   implementation details and perhaps expanding other sections a little
   would lead to a better paper.

   I'd also have liked to have seen the R code included with the submission.
   A link to github isn't the same thing, and there's no guarantee it'll be
   there for future readers. 

The Review

   This is a well-written and clearly explained paper. Fitting so many
   existing plots into a framework is a valuable outcome, and I particularly
   liked the natural extension to polar coordinates. While none of the
   visualisations are new, seeing them in this context gave me a new
   appreciation.

   I had some problems, though, in classifying this paper - it falls
   somewhere between theory/model (describes a theoretical framework that
   encompasses a large number of existing visualisations) and technique
   (code is provided to implement the framework). I'm not sure if it'd be
   better to simplify the classification by omitting mention of the code
   except as a note near the end - while it's interesting, it's not core to
   the paper. 

   Doing this would leave more space to address some other minor concerns
   with the figures: in figures 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 it's quite clear that the
   labels on the plot have spacing issues that could be resolved with larger
   figures. Additionally, figure 4 spills over the gutter into the text in
   the right column. 

   In terms of text, I noticed some typos (first page, "This framework is
   based on the fundamental statistical idea that high any high dimensional
   distribution" has too many "high"s), one slight miss in phrasing ('weed
   down' sounds like a mixed metaphor between 'weed out' and 'cut down') and
   perhaps the last column of the conclusion could benefit from editing
   (repetition of 'generally' stands out).

   In summary:
   Minor Revisions Required
   - figure sizing and labelling
   - minor typos, grammar and phrasing
   - clarification of paper type by omitting implementation details and
   possible expansion of other sections


